High level overview doc "How it works" (#149)
DefangLabs/defang-docs: docs/intro/how-it-works.mdx

---
sidebar_position: 250
title: How it Works
description: Overview of the Defang platform and how it works in your cloud
---

# How Defang Works

Defang is a radically simpler way to develop, deploy, and debug applications in your favourite cloud. Defang abstracts away the complexity of cloud infrastructure, providing you with a streamlined experience.

> 

Author: We might want to have a section on bootstrapping here to describe how Defang sets itself up in a users cloud account.

Author: ```suggestion
## Bootstrapping

The first time you deploy with Defang, a new `cd` service will be created in your cloud account. This service acts as an intermediary between you and your cloud provider. The Defang CLI will communicate with this service to orchestrate the build and deployment process for your services. We will also create the necessary resources to support the defang system. This includes things like roles, a storage space, an image repository, certificates, etc. The specific resources created depend on the cloud provider. You can learn more about the specifics by visiting our [provider docs](/docs/category/providers).
```

> Defang is a radically simpler way to develop, deploy, and debug applications in your favourite cloud. Defang abstracts away the complexity of cloud infrastructure and provides a streamlined experience to develop, deploy, and debug your cloud applications.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Defang is a radically simpler way to develop, deploy, and debug applications in your favourite cloud. Defang abstracts away the complexity of cloud infrastructure, providing you a streamlined experience.
```

Reviewer: to avoid repeating the phrase twice

Reviewer: to avoid repeating the phrase twice^

```mermaid

flowchart TD
  subgraph workspace["Local Workspace"]
    compose[compose.yaml]
    cli("Defang CLI")
  end

  subgraph cloud["Cloud"]
    sdk(("SDK"))
    cd(cd)
    kaniko(Kaniko)

    subgraph services[" "]
      service1("Service 1")
      service2("Service 2")
      service3("Service 3")
    end
  end

compose --> cli

cli <--> cd
cd --> kaniko
cd --> sdk
sdk --> services

```

> 

Author: I wonder if we should have a section about how the project needs to be containerized with a `compose.yaml` file here. Then we can say that the defang cli uploads the project source code and compose.yaml file to an s3 bucket in the users cloud account. Before going on to describe what the cd service does with it below.

Reviewer 2: I've been asked about whether Defang can see user source or not in a workshop. @edwardrf mentioned that we cannot in BYOC case but in playground we do not encrypt the S3 bucket. Might be worth adding a line about it.

> ## Defang CD

Author: ```suggestion
## Orchestrating Deployments
```

> The first time you deploy with Defang, we will create a new `cd` service in your cloud account. This service acts as an intermediary between you and your cloud provider. The Defang CLI will communicate with this service to orchestrate the build and deployment process for your services.

Author: Move this first sentence up into a new section on how defang bootstraps itself.
```suggestion
The `cd` service acts as an intermediary between you and your cloud provider. The Defang CLI will communicate with this service to orchestrate the build and deployment process for your services.
```

:::info

> This service does not run all the time. It is only used when you deploy a new service or update an existing service. Once it has finished deploying your service, it will shut itself down.

Author: ```suggestion
The `cd` service does not run all the time. It is only used when you deploy a new service or update an existing service. Once it has finished deploying your service, it will shut itself down.
```

:::

> ## Image Builds

Author: ```suggestion
## Building Images
```

> When you deploy a new service, Defang will build a Docker image from your source code. `cd` will determine if your service's image needs to be rebuilt, and if it does it will start a new container for each build it needs to complete. Defang uses [Kaniko](https://github.com/GoogleContainerTools/kaniko/actions/workflows/images.yaml) to build your images in a container in your cloud account. The resulting images will be stored in your cloud account's private container registry for future reference. Defang will then deploy this image to your cloud account as a new service.

Reviewer 2: linke to the repo start page ( https://github.com/GoogleContainerTools/kaniko ) rather than the build page. The repo start page has more details about kaniko itself and may be better for users to learn about it.

Author: Thanks. not sure how I missed that.

```suggestion
When you deploy a new service, Defang will build a Docker image from your source code. `cd` will determine if your service's image needs to be rebuilt, and if it does it will start a new container for each build it needs to complete. Defang uses [Kaniko](https://github.com/GoogleContainerTools/kaniko) to build your images in a container in your cloud account. The resulting images will be stored in your cloud account's private container registry for future reference. Defang will then deploy this image to your cloud account as a new service.
```

## Service Provisioning

> Once your service's image has been built, Defang will provision cloud resources for your application's services. Defang uses the cloud provider's SDK to create the necessary resources for your services. This includes creating a new container, setting up networking, and configuring any other resources your service needs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once your services’ images have been built, Defang will provision cloud resources for your application's services. Defang uses the cloud provider's SDK to create the necessary resources for your services. This includes creating a new container, setting up networking, and configuring any other resources your services needs.
```

:::info
The `cd` service does not run all the time. It is only used when you deploy a new service or update an existing service. Once it has finished deploying your service, it will shut itself down.
:::

```mermaid

flowchart TD
  subgraph workspace["Local Workspace"]
    compose[compose.yaml]
    cli("Defang CLI")
  end

  subgraph cloud["Cloud"]
    sdk(("SDK"))
    cd(cd)
    kaniko(Kaniko)

    subgraph services[" "]
      service1("Service 1")
      service2("Service 2")
      service3("Service 3")
    end
  end

compose --> cli

cli <--> cd
cd --> kaniko
cd --> sdk
sdk --> services

```

## Orchestrating Deployments

The Defang `cd` service acts as an intermediary between you and your cloud provider. This service receives deployment requests from the Defang CLI. Once a request has been received, `cd` orchestrates the process of building application images from your source code, and then continues to provision the necessary resources to deploy your application.

:::info
The `defang` cli will upload your source code to a storage destination within your cloud. Your source code is never processed by our servers.
:::

## Building Images

> When you deploy a new service, Defang will build a Docker image from your source code. `cd` will determine if your service's image needs to be rebuilt, and if it does it will start a new container for each build it needs to complete. Defang uses [Kaniko](https://github.com/GoogleContainerTools/kaniko) to build your images in a container in your cloud account. The resulting images will be stored in your cloud account's private container registry for future reference. Defang will then deploy this image to your cloud account as a new service.

Author: ```suggestion
When you deploy a new service, Defang will build a Docker image from your source code. This source code is uploaded by the `defang` cli to a storage destination in your cloud account. The Defang `cd` service will then retrieve it and determine if each of your service's images need to be rebuilt. If rebuilding is necessary, `cd` will start a new container for each build it needs to complete.

Defang uses [Kaniko](https://github.com/GoogleContainerTools/kaniko) to build your images in a container in your cloud account. The resulting images will be stored in your cloud account's private container registry for future reference.

After your images have been built, `cd` will deploy these images to your cloud account as new services.
```

## Service Provisioning

> Once your services’ images have been built, Defang will provision cloud resources for your application's services. Defang uses the cloud provider's SDK to create the necessary resources for your services. This includes creating a new container, setting up networking, and configuring any other resources your services needs.

Author: ```suggestion
After your images have been built, `cd` will provision the necessary resources and deploy these images as new services in your cloud account. Defang uses the cloud provider's SDK to create the necessary resources for your services. This may include creating new containers, setting up networking, and configuring any other resources your services needs, such as storage resources.
```

---
sidebar_position: 250
title: How it Works
description: Overview of the Defang platform and how it works in your cloud
---

# How Defang Works

Defang is a radically simpler way to develop, deploy, and debug applications in your favourite cloud. Defang abstracts away the complexity of cloud infrastructure, providing you with a streamlined experience. Defang works by provisioning a "cd" service and a small set of resources in your cloud account. These services enable Defang to orchestrate deployments for you in your cloud account from the Defang CLI. Here's how it works.

## Bootstrapping

> The first time you deploy with Defang, a new `cd` service will be created in your cloud account. This service acts as an intermediary between you and your cloud provider. The Defang CLI will communicate with this service to orchestrate the build and deployment process for your services. We will also create the necessary resources to support the defang system. This includes things like roles, a storage space, an image repository, certificates, etc. The specific resources created depend on the cloud provider. You can learn more about the specifics by visiting our [provider docs](/docs/category/providers).

Reviewer 3: expand on what is cd. e.g. The first time you deploy with Defang, a new `cd` (continuous deployment) service will...

Reviewer 3: Also, we might want to mention that our design and implementation go through a security and "well-architected" reviews before we certify a provider for production. So far, we have done this for AWS and are working on it for DO and GCP.

:::info
The `cd` service does not run all the time. It is only used when you deploy a new service or update an existing service. Once it has finished deploying your service, it will shut itself down.
:::

```mermaid

flowchart TD
  subgraph workspace["Local Workspace"]
    compose[compose.yaml]
    cli("Defang CLI")
  end

  subgraph cloud["Cloud"]
    sdk(("SDK"))
    cd(cd)
    kaniko(Kaniko)

    subgraph services[" "]
      service1("Service 1")
      service2("Service 2")
      service3("Service 3")
    end
  end

compose --> cli

cli <--> cd
cd --> kaniko
cd --> sdk
sdk --> services

```

## Orchestrating Deployments

The Defang `cd` service acts as an intermediary between you and your cloud provider. This service receives deployment requests from the Defang CLI. Once a request has been received, `cd` orchestrates the process of building application images from your source code, and then continues to provision the necessary resources to deploy your application.

:::info

> The `defang` cli will upload your source code to a storage destination within your cloud. Your source code is never processed by our servers.

Reviewer 3: Clarify: Your source code is never processed by Defang's servers.

Author: ```suggestion
The `defang` cli will upload your source code to a storage destination within your cloud. Your source code is never processed by Defang's servers.
```

:::

## Building Images

> When you deploy a new service, Defang will build a Docker image from your source code. This source code is uploaded by the `defang` cli to a storage destination in your cloud account. The Defang `cd` service will then retrieve it and determine if each of your service's images need to be rebuilt. If rebuilding is necessary, `cd` will start a new container for each build it needs to complete.

Reviewer 3: We should also address what happens when you update an existing service.

Author: ```suggestion
When you deploy a new service, Defang will build a Docker image from your source code. This source code is uploaded by the `defang` cli to a storage destination in your cloud account. The Defang `cd` service will then retrieve it and determine if each of your service's images need to be rebuilt. If rebuilding is necessary, `cd` will start a new container for each build it needs to complete.

When you deploy an update to an existing service, the Defang `cd` service will determine if rebuilding your service's images is necessary. For example, when deploying new source code, `cd` will request that a new image be built. When deploying an update which does not require a new image, one will not be built—for example, redeploying the same service with increased or decreased resource requirements. In this case, the same image can be deployed to newly provisioned cloud resources.
```

Defang uses [Kaniko](https://github.com/GoogleContainerTools/kaniko) to build your images in a container in your cloud account. The resulting images will be stored in your cloud account's private container registry for future reference.

## Service Provisioning

> After your images have been built, `cd` will provision the necessary resources and deploy these images as new services in your cloud account. Defang uses the cloud provider's SDK to create the necessary resources for your services. This may include creating new containers, setting up networking, and configuring any other resources your services needs, such as storage resources.

Reviewer 3: Related to comment above, we should describe how we do the update depending on deployment mode (dev versus staging versus prod).

Author: ```suggestion
After your images have been built, `cd` will provision the necessary resources and deploy these images as new services in your cloud account. Defang uses the cloud provider's SDK to create the necessary resources for your services. This may include creating new containers, setting up networking, and configuring any other resources your services needs, such as storage resources.

When deploying changes to existing services, the `cd` service will determine the minimum set of changes necessary and add, remove, replace, or update services as necessary.
```
